# Root:Shoot Ratio Analysis 

## Abstract: 
Soil communities have profound impacts on their surrounding habitats and play a critical role in maintaining the stability of Earth’s ecosystems. Thus, it is essential that the health of these communities is preserved as environmental conditions change in light of climate change. To understand how soil-microbe interactions may be effected by climate change, researchers at Stockholm University and the Ohio State University conducted an experiment in which seeds/plants were exposed to different temperature and soil moisture conditions. Motivated by a personal love for preserving the environment and fascination with microbes, I focused on the variables “temperature manipulation type” and “Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi (AMF) percent colonization” from the dataset to investigate how these variables effect the “plant root:shoot ratio” variable. The data was analyzed with a two-sample t-test using the categorical variable of temperature manipulation type, and a linear regression model using the numeric variable of AMF percent colonization. The results of these statistical analyses conclude that temperature does have a significant impact on plant root:shoot ratio, and AMF percent colonization is a significant predictor of root:shoot ratio.

## Data : 
This dataset was gathered by researchers at Stockholm University and the Ohio State University while examining the impact of changing environmental conditions on soil-microbe interactions. This data was collected as a part of a study that was then published in the British Ecological Society's Journal of Ecology and is title "The impact of elevated temperature and drought on the ecology and evolution of plant--soil microbe interactions".

Analysis conducted as apart of UC Santa Barbara's course EEMB 146, Biometry. 
